Add multimodal search/sparse search/pre- and post-processing function documentation (#5168)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/neural-sparse-search.md

---
layout: default
title: Sparse search
nav_order: 30
has_children: false
parent: Neural search
---

# Sparse search
Introduced 2.11
{: .label .label-purple }

> [Neural text search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-text-search/) relies on dense retrieval that is based on text embedding models. However, dense methods use k-NN search, which consumes a large amount of memory and CPU resources. An alternative to neural text search, sparse neural search is implemented using an inverted index and thus is as efficient as BM25. Sparse search is facilitated by sparse embedding models. When you perform a sparse search, it creates a sparse vector (a list of `token: weight` key/value pairs representing an entry and its weight) and ingests data into a rank features index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Neural text search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/neural-text-search/) relies on dense retrieval that is based on text embedding models. However, dense methods use k-NN search, which consumes a large amount of memory and CPU resources. An alternative to neural text search, sparse neural search is implemented using an inverted index and thus is as efficient as BM25. Sparse search is facilitated by sparse embedding models. When you perform a sparse search, it creates a sparse vector (a list of `token: weight` key-value pairs representing an entry and its weight) and ingests data into a rank features index.
```

## Step 2: Create an index for ingestion

In order to use the text embedding processor defined in your pipelines, create a rank features index, adding the pipeline created in the previous step as the default pipeline. Ensure that the fields defined in the `field_map` are mapped as correct types. Continuing with the example, the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as a k-NN vector with a dimension that matches the model dimension. Similarly, the `passage_text` field should be mapped as `text`.

The following example request creates a rank features index that is set up with a default ingest pipeline:

```json
PUT /my-nlp-index
{
  "settings": {
    "default_pipeline": "nlp-ingest-pipeline-sparse"
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "id": {
        "type": "text"
      },
      "passage_embedding": {
        "type": "rank_features"
      },
      "passage_text": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

For more information about the rank features field type, see [Rank features]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/rank/#rank-features).

## Step 3: Ingest documents into the index

> To ingest documents into the index created in the previous step, send a POST request for each document:

Reviewer: See earlier comment about POST/PUT

1. [Search the index using neural search](#step-4-search-the-index-using-neural-search).

## Step 1: Create an ingest pipeline

To generate vector embeddings, you need to create an [ingest pipeline]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/index/) that contains a [`sparse_encoding` processor]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/processors/sparse-encoding/), which will convert the text in a document field to vector embeddings. The processor's `field_map` determines the input fields from which to generate vector embeddings and the output fields in which to store the embeddings.

The following example request creates an ingest pipeline where the text from `passage_text` will be converted into text embeddings and the embeddings will be stored in `passage_embedding`:

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/nlp-ingest-pipeline-sparse
{
  "description": "An sparse encoding ingest pipeline",
  "processors": [
    {
      "sparse_encoding": {
        "model_id": "aP2Q8ooBpBj3wT4HVS8a",
        "field_map": {
          "passage_text": "passage_embedding"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Step 2: Create an index for ingestion

> In order to use the text embedding processor defined in your pipelines, create a rank features index, adding the pipeline created in the previous step as the default pipeline. Ensure that the fields defined in the `field_map` are mapped as correct types. Continuing with the example, the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as [`rank_features`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/rank/#rank-features). Similarly, the `passage_text` field should be mapped as `text`.

Reviewer 2: Confirm that the first instance of "pipelines" shouldn't be singular.

> In order to use the text embedding processor defined in your pipelines, create a rank features index, adding the pipeline created in the previous step as the default pipeline. Ensure that the fields defined in the `field_map` are mapped as correct types. Continuing with the example, the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as [`rank_features`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/rank/#rank-features). Similarly, the `passage_text` field should be mapped as `text`.

Author: ```suggestion
In order to use the text embedding processor defined in your pipeline, create a rank features index, adding the pipeline created in the previous step as the default pipeline. Ensure that the fields defined in the `field_map` are mapped as correct types. Continuing with the example, the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as [`rank_features`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/field-types/supported-field-types/rank/#rank-features). Similarly, the `passage_text` field should be mapped as `text`.
```

The following example request creates a rank features index that is set up with a default ingest pipeline:

```json
PUT /my-nlp-index
{
  "settings": {
    "default_pipeline": "nlp-ingest-pipeline-sparse"
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "id": {
        "type": "text"
      },
      "passage_embedding": {
        "type": "rank_features"
      },
      "passage_text": {
        "type": "text"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Step 3: Ingest documents into the index

To ingest documents into the index created in the previous step, send the following requests:

```json
PUT /my-nlp-index/_doc/1
{
  "passage_text": "Hello world",
  "id": "s1"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

```json
PUT /my-nlp-index/_doc/2
{
  "passage_text": "Hi planet",
  "id": "s2"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Before the document is ingested into the index, the ingest pipeline runs the `sparse_encoding` processor on the document, generating vector embeddings for the `passage_text` field. The indexed document contains the `passage_text` field that has the original text and the `passage_embedding` field that has the vector embeddings. 

Author: ```suggestion
Before the document is ingested into the index, the ingest pipeline runs the `sparse_encoding` processor on the document, generating vector embeddings for the `passage_text` field. The indexed document includes the `passage_text` field, which contains the original text, and the `passage_embedding` field, which contains the vector embeddings. 
```

1. [Search the index using neural search](#step-4-search-the-index-using-neural-search).

## Step 1: Create an ingest pipeline

To generate vector embeddings, you need to create an [ingest pipeline]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/index/) that contains a [`sparse_encoding` processor]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/processors/sparse-encoding/), which will convert the text in a document field to vector embeddings. The processor's `field_map` determines the input fields from which to generate vector embeddings and the output fields in which to store the embeddings.

The following example request creates an ingest pipeline where the text from `passage_text` will be converted into text embeddings and the embeddings will be stored in `passage_embedding`:

```json
PUT /_ingest/pipeline/nlp-ingest-pipeline-sparse
{
  "description": "An sparse encoding ingest pipeline",
  "processors": [
    {
      "sparse_encoding": {
        "model_id": "aP2Q8ooBpBj3wT4HVS8a",
        "field_map": {
          "passage_text": "passage_embedding"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

## Step 2: Create an index for ingestion

> In order to use the text embedding processor defined in your pipelines, create a rank features index, adding the pipeline created in the previous step as the default pipeline. Ensure that the fields defined in the `field_map` are mapped as correct types. Continuing with the example, the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as a k-NN vector with a dimension that matches the model dimension. Similarly, the `passage_text` field should be mapped as `text`.

Reviewer 3: the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as a k-NN vector with a dimension that matches the model dimension -> the `passage_embedding` field must be mapped as a rank_features type.
